“Be transformed by making your mind over”
—what really is involved with this process?
Well, when we analyze this verse
at Romans 12:2,
perhaps there are four things initially
that we need to remember.
First of all, to whom was Paul writing
under inspiration?
Well, he was writing to Christians
who were anointed, who were faithful,
and yet he used an imperative form,
saying: “Be  transformed.”
He didn’t say,
“You were already transformed.”
So that’s an interesting point for us
because when we read these words,
it’s not just a matter of us remembering
what happened to us in the past
when we became Christians,
but it’s something
that we need to focus on now.
And that’s highlighted by the second point:
that in the original language,
the verbs used here
indicate a continual process,
not just something that happens once
and that’s it.
And the third point:
that it indicates a complete change.
Now, many of us remember
that the Greek word here
involves a complete change.
“Metamorphosis” is the word
that comes from that.
And that reminds us of a caterpillar
changing into a butterfly.
Now, by this, we’re not inferring
that we all have to become butterflies.
But the point highlighted is
that it’s a complete change
from something that is one form to another.
So in a similar way,
with regard to our personality,
this is not just a superficial change,
as if we were changing our clothing
but, rather, a deep-down change
that involves our personality.
So we change from one person to another.
Of course, this takes time.
And that’s the fourth point
we need to keep in mind:
It’s a gradual process.
Not always is it just completely progressing
in a positive sense.
Sometimes, for many of us,
we make some progress
and then slip back a little,
and then we make some further progress.
But the main thing is
that we’re making progress.
Yes, this is not just something
that you do one time, and that’s it forever.
That’s highlighted by an experience
in The Watchtower  back in 1977
of a brother, Harry Yoshikawa, from Hawaii.
He was a very large Japanese brother.
But before coming into the truth,
he was a street brawler.
And, in fact, the article
(his life experience) was
“From Street Brawler to Christian Minister.”
Now, Harry was trained in the martial arts.
He was trained in boxing,
and he just enjoyed fighting other people.
But after serving in the military
for a while,
eventually he came in contact with the truth,
and he started to make changes.
And his life story
perhaps helps us to realize
what’s involved with these changes.
So, of course, he stopped drinking;
he stopped fighting.
But Harry goes on to tell us
about the first day that he went witnessing.
He was in a market area,
holding up the Awake!  magazine.
And he was calling out, “Read the Awake!”
Well, all of a sudden,
some smart person said to him:
“I’m wide awake so I don’t need
that trashy magazine.”
Well, Harry says that at that point,
his old personality returned to him.
He yelled out: “You’re wide awake, huh?
“Well, you won’t be for long.
You’ll be sleeping shortly.”
So Harry took a blow at this man,
who promptly ran,
and Harry chased him for two blocks.
Now, the other brother who was with Harry
chased after him,
and fortunately the first man
was a fast runner.
And when the other brother
caught up with Harry, he said,
“Harry, what would you have done
if you caught the man?”
He said, “I would have beat him up.”
And the brother tried to reason with Harry,
“Well, just imagine what a reproach
this would be on Jehovah’s name,
I mean, if the police came.”
And Harry said: “No, it wouldn’t be.
“I wouldn’t tell him I was a Witness.
I’d say I was a Pentecostal.”
Well, Harry hadn’t quite made
that complete change.
But later, you see in this picture,
as it appeared in The Watchtower,
here’s Harry working with his wife,
doing something that many Asian men
would find very hard to do,
helping her in the kitchen.
And for many years, Harry and his wife
served very faithfully in the circuit work.
And the change was so different
that many of the brothers and sisters
who heard this story about Harry
—who was called, by the way,
Tiny the Bruiser—
didn’t really believe
that he was such a violent man previously.
So, what do we learn from this?
That this transformation process
may involve some drastic changes
in the beginning
that outwardly
appear to make someone different.
But gradually over the years,
we have to continue on making these changes,
transforming our thinking and our desires.
Now, why is that such a challenge?
Well, we know for a start
that we have a tendency
to do what’s wrong because we’re sinful.
There are all sorts of wrong attitudes
and thoughts
that are perhaps lying dormant
in our personality.
It could be a matter of prejudice;
it could be a racial viewpoint,
hatred, pride, greed.
And these things we could liken
to weeds in a garden.
Any of us who have done gardening realize
that just because you took the weeds out
one time,
doesn’t mean that’s a onetime effort,
does it?
They tend to grow back.
So we constantly need to be on the watch
to make sure
that these weedlike tendencies, or traits,
that we may have
don’t grow back.
And, of course, the other thing is
we’re surrounded by Satan and his world.
And Satan’s world is always trying
to influence us.
Let’s take our Bibles
and turn together, please,
to the book of Ephesians
—Ephesians 4:18.
And notice here
how it describes Satan’s world.
It’s the opposite to what we should be doing.
It says: “They are in darkness mentally
“and alienated from the life
that belongs to God,
“because of the ignorance that is in them,
because of the insensitivity
[or, the “dulling,” ftn.] of their hearts.”
So Satan is trying to muddy the waters,
we might say,
trying to get us mentally to be dull
—to not be receptive to God’s Word.
So that’s why we need to continue
to “be transformed
by making [our] mind over.”
But how can we do that?
Well, we’re not going to discuss at depth
the physical explanation
with regard to neurons and synapses
(this is early in the morning for that),
but we do need to understand
a little bit of how the mind works.
You see, basically we can say
that when we have new thoughts,
or new concepts,
that come into our mind,
it’s as if symbolically
there are little pathways
that are formed in our mind.
And the more that we think
about certain things,
the more solid, we might say,
or more permanent,
these pathways become.
So maybe we could illustrate it this way:
You see, as we’re starting
to learn new things,
it’s as if we’re going through the jungle.
And as we’re cutting our way
through the jungle,
at first, it is very difficult.
Perhaps, we could say,
it’s like learning a new language.
We all know (if we’ve tried to do that)
that at first, it is very, very difficult.
It’s like cutting your way
through a jungle path.
Or if you’re trying to learn something new,
like driving an automobile,
it can seem very difficult.
But what do we realize?
The more often we do something,
then what happens?
These symbolic pathways in our minds
become easier to walk along.
On the other hand, of course,
if we do something once
but we don’t continue to do it, what happens?
It’s as if the jungle grows back,
and it becomes difficult to do things again.
So, what’s the point for us to get from this?
Well, in our personal study, our meditation,
and when we try to apply
the things that we learn,
we shouldn’t always look for new things.
You see, sometimes we might say:
“Well, I’ve read that publication already.
I don’t need to reread it.”
Yes, you do.
Why?
Because just because you cut
a path in your mind through the jungle
doesn’t mean to say that that path
is always going to remain easy
to pass through.
No, it’s good for us to go back again
and go over and over the same things.
And what happens?
That symbolic pathway in our mind
becomes easier for us to go along,
and we can truly say
that we have been “transformed
by making [our] mind over.”